hello community so great that you are
back today we talk about three insane
test time training ideas because have a
look is it possible that we have a 7
billion model here that beats deep seek
R1 and open
ei1 yes absolutely with test time
scaling done the intelligent way and
it's it possible that we have a 1
billion llm a little tiny one does it
Sur pass here 400 5 billion llama model
well if you apply a 1 billion with an
intelligent TTS yes it will be here a
performance test a single performance
test against a
405b so we are talking about some
amazing enhancement here for the Deep
reasoning capabilities and the
computational efficiencies of our llms
that go simple Beyond scaling the model
parameters so what we're going to have a
look we have a look at TTS and then
examine in two specific cases of TTS we
will build here finally a new
Transformer model so TTS will lead us to
a new Transformer three new research
paper let's go for it so if we open up
this video you know what we know in the
old times no we have our M pre-trained
supervised find you and DPO aligned and
the only way we could choose was simply
scaling you the model parameters go with
a 1 billion model or 45 billion Lama
model and this is all we had and we saw
the world is
beautiful but now now we explore test
time scaling as a real Paradigm Shift
focusing here on the strategically
allocated computational resources during
now the inference phase to really really
augment the inherent reasoning abilities
of a pre-trained and fine-tuned
llm so test time scaling is happening
now during the inference run and the
question is how can we manipulate the
interference process to have a superior
performance here and what are the
optimal strategies for allocating and
managing your inference time compute in
the best way so that a 1 billion model a
tiny small language model will beat a 45
billion Lama
model now you know it is easy we have a
query then we have your pre-trained
model and then test time scaling we can
get had some different answers now the
idea is we build a solution space and we
say hey let's think about this in a
mathematical way that this is a
mathematical space where all the
possible solution to this specific qua
of mine they live here in this box and
this is the solution space and in some
Corners they are highly complex solution
and in some Corners they are empty in
some Corners oh yeah you get the real
hint that you need to solve here the
puzzle to to search you a complete
solution space you can either improve
your search time say hey yeah take too
many time in the inference run now or we
improve the search algorithm or and
there other options we're going to
explore today so let's come here to the
spark of our genius that we have today
and we will know and you notice as a
subscriber of my channel that we work
here with process rewards model to
navigate here the search space in order
to find here the potentially best
solution to this very special query of
mine where a deep reasoning needs to be
and you know what is the simplest of the
search space solution no the best of n
sampling simply sampling your n outputs
here in parallel from a base language
mod and selecting one that scores the
highest per a learn verifier or be more
specific every word model so we can have
maybe another llm a more intelligent llm
and tells me hey A3 is the best solution
continue with
A3 if you want to know the origin and I
sit down here the origin of LM to my
knowledge is here either by open ey or
end of May 2023 where they look at the
process supervision which provides
feedback for each intermediate reasoning
step can you imagine May 23 open in the
eye or and I'm looking here at the
version three so this is from fabruary
2024 but in also in 2023 we had here
deep seek AI together with chingua
University in the University of Hong
Kong on a higho State University they
were also here assigning your rewards
course to each step of a mathematical
problem solution so for my knowledge if
you really want to see it origin those
are the two papers you should look at
but now look at this process reward
model what they do they simply evaluate
the intermediate reasoning steps
creating here a feedback loop that
guides here our TTS
strategies and the alignment now between
on the one hand the policy model what do
we have this is an llm that outputs here
something and the process reward model
this is also an llm the PRM training
data this alignment here is critically
it impacts here the reward validity and
the search efficiency so note the policy
model output and the PRM training data
they better are really really connected
they coherent and you trained your
process reward model on those
data just a little detail we have on
policy prms and off policy prms simple
on policy prms are trained on the policy
models own outputs and they provide an
accurate step level reward but Inc
training overhead and with off policy
prams you introduce here of course
addition distribution shift because
you're working here with different llms
that have been trained on a different
training data distribution and therefore
you do have a distributional shift so
maybe your PRM was trained on
mathematics and my policy model is in
theoretical physics so I will have a
distribution shift also between
mathematics and theortical physics it is
okay you can see this very clearly take
simply a mystal based PRM and a myal
based PRM assigns 83% High rewards to
incorrect short answers compared to a
properly aligned deep seek PRM nothing
against Mist but a mini a real
professional model there are still
something where you can gain significant
performance let's come to the first
paper of today can a 1 billion nlm surur
a 45 billion llm yes of course if you do
the optimal compute test time scaling
Shanghai AI laboratory chuai University
hin and B
isn't this beautiful you know what we
have the complete code for this there is
a GitHub and it's everything is there
it's have a deep dive enjoy
this and you know what the idea was
simple this is just a week ago February
10th
2025 they told us hey current studies do
not systematically analyze how the
policy models how the process reward
model and the inherent problem
difficulties with what I call the
complexity of a mathematical problem
influence here our TTS algorithms and
they say this lack of analysis limits
our understanding and our practical use
of TTS
methodologies and they set out to
examine this in detail and we will have
a very short look but please and this is
exactly where I took my example for
imagine you have your deep seek R1 and
your beloved open
ey1 and you can have a 7 billion TTS
model that beats both of them in logic
in mathematical reasoning I'm loving it
do you know what this means this means
that a 7B model is better than a
671 billion free trainable parameter
deeps
o1 the times are simply amazing and this
is done on mat 500
Benchmark so let's have a look let's
just understand what they are doing here
and you're not going to believe it it's
going to be a mathematical optimization
problem like almost everything else you
know there's nothing that you say yeah
with common sense I can imagine I just
try out for get it it's pure
mathematical optimization Theory so
let's State the problem the problem
formulation according to the ERS here is
let's take this in detail say we
formulate a reasoning problem as a mark
of decision process beautiful so we
Define here a specific tble where we
have here the state space we have the
action space and we have a transition
function plus we have here with r our
reward function and a specific discount
Factor they say now give my prompt X so
this is my query X the policy with the
parameters Theta generates here an
initial action so the very first Alpha
One A1 where this is an initial State
the policy model now receives a specific
reward that depends on S1 and A1 and
then we have a state transition to the
state S2 where this notes Here the
concatenation of the two strings and
I'll show you this in a b detail a
little bit later on and this process
simply continues till the episode
terminates and this is it so couldn't be
easier you see this is the interplay of
our models of our llms policy State
space action space reward function we
have an initial State S1 then we have an
action body llm
a then we have a transition from a
particular State a S1 to a state s
t+1 and we have a specific reward from a
reward models given that simply judges
here the beneficial of this action if
you want to achieve a certain
goal now in the classical Theory and
this is now here paper I'm going to show
you in a minute this will be our second
paper of today just remember Snell and
now they say hey you know classically
the compute the op optimal test time
scaling what we do we follow here now
from
2024 because proposes here test time
compute optimal scaling strategy which
selects hyperparameter corresponding to
a given time test time strategy to
maximize the performance benefits on a
specific very specific prompt on your
prompt so give him a prompt X let Target
of theta and an X represented the output
distribution overx produced by the
policy model with the parameters Theta
and compute budget of
n we have here now Teta star and this
represents now the test time compute
optimal scaling strategy for the problem
x with the compute budget n and you see
it is simple a mathematical optimization
problem it is so
beautiful it is pure
mathematics and now the artist come and
say hey wait a minute we will now
optimize this no and the aors now say
hey based on this findings we propose
now that the rewards should be
integrated into the computer optimal TTS
strategy and again the reward function
is or and they have now a new data store
and they say our reward aware this is
the new part the reward aware compute
optimal TTS strategy is now formulated
as
this again everything more or less the
same just adjusted Now by a specific
reward function that you choose and the
reward model that you choose for your
particular
topic isn't this beautiful and they say
hey this reward aware strategy ensures
that a compute optimal scaling adapts to
the policy model to your specific prompt
to the reward function leading here in
total to a general framework for
practical TTS test time
scaling and with this mathematical
optimization
we have now that a 1 billion llama 3.2
model achieves parity in the performance
on a mathematical 500 Benchmark with a
llama 3.1
45p isn't this impossible I thought it
this would never happen I was sure that
a 1 billion model how can this little
nothing have here the computer
performance here in mathematical logic
like a llama
45b and now mid of February 202 5 we
achieved it but it is not not that some
people say yeah just give it more time
no way it is a mathematical optimization
problem that is not trivial because you
compute now here the candidate solution
under the computer optimal TTS yes you
generate 30 times more candidate
Solutions here by our little 1B model
but you don't just say hey do more or do
the same again again no you have a
computer optimal strategy that you have
to optimize and this is now this
beautiful new computer optimal test time
scaling strategy for your particular
query for your particular
model isn't this
beautiful now I know that there are more
advanced PRM like we going to have a
look at and I already showed you some of
them you remember the Q value ranking I
showed you in my video about I don't
know four 5 days back you can go also
with entropy
regularization there are so many more
advanced PM models but you know we go
here with a compute efficient
model so again if you are completely new
to TTS never mind it is easy listen what
are the main elements two we have our
policy model we call it PM this is an
specific
llm this if you think about it this is
the Reasoner this model is doing you the
reasoning step this is the problem
solver to my query to my problem that I
give to the AI system so the policy
model is the core llm responsible for
generating solution to the given problem
to task it is the primary reason or
problem Sol in the system and this
embodies now a specific reasoning
strategy whether it's standard forward
inference or it incorporates here an
internal TTS mechanism like recurrent
dep we're going to talk at the second of
my video and normally we have here the L
3 family or the Q 2.5 family and then
then we have here the process reward
model please note this is not the
outcome reward model from 2024 where we
said yeah we just wait here till here
the complete monol research finishes no
we have now a process a dense process
reward model and this is our verifier
this is our second brain this is here
the external coach that gives you here
feedback on every step of your logical
deductions this is the
evaluator so this PRM is an auxiliary
llm responsible for evaluating the
quality of the reasoning process
exhibited by the policy model verify a
critique a reward function within the
TTS system but they must be coherent
they must be trained on the same domain
knowledge they must be trained to do
more or less here the same task
otherwise
yeah if this is on a different domain
there's not a lot of value in the PRM so
careful prms are sensitive topics PRS
are trained particular to evaluate
individual steps of window the solution
trajectory generated by the policy model
yet you have a scolar reward signal here
for each single step y step providing a
dense reward signal for the DDS
algorithm and the PRM scores are used to
guide now the search based TDS
methodology and we already we talked
about best of end we will talk about
beam search in a second in now selecting
the most promising solution puff and
ranking here the candidate
answers isn't this beautiful in one of
my last video I show you here the PRM
training based on the mol roll outs but
you don't need to go a little bit more
advanced you can go with a simple q and
2.5 mathematic PRM where do you find it
on hugging face here we have it q1 q1
2.5 mat PRM 72b
here you have in addition here to the
mathematical outcome reward model now a
process reward model so you can be quite
sure that if you go with a Q 2.5 here as
your policy model if you take this this
might really have a comparable data set
training coherence isn't this beautiful
yeah and if you're new say hey what is a
process now that a process is a
three-step process couldn't be
easier we have to the policy model our
llm generates the candidates so the
policy model given now my specific
problem generates a set of candidate
solution or solution steps in a search
based methodology we search here a
complete space of all the possible
solution given that we have the idea
that our solution is in this space and
for each solution step that we take here
the policy model generates this step we
have now here a search
step this is evaluated by the processor
reward model this processor reward Lo
evaluates now everything access a verify
evaluating the quality of each kind of
solution of each step assigning here the
famous reward
scores and then and this is the final
part the TTS algorithm that we use beam
search best of end or whatever the TTS
algorithm uses now the PRM course to
guide here the selection process the
reasoning process choosing now the most
promising candidate to explore further I
the or in the refinement in the
self-reflection OR selecting already the
best final answer in the best of ends
scenario if you have a TTS algorithm of
best of n so you see it's an easy
interplay you have two llms of course it
could be the same it could be real
specialized modes that you train for
this particular task it's all up to you
how advanced you go with those modes but
in general by Ling the prm's guidance
the TTS process effectively refines the
the poliy model output distribution
leading to improved performance compared
here to the standard inference of our
non TTS models and you see with this
optimization that we choose the right
policy model the right PM model the
perfect TTS algorithm and it is the
interplay of those three elements that
we can optimize and get a performance
that is simply
insane if you only know a 1 billion to a
45 billion
parameter
model so what we achieved we achieved we
even had a look at a reward aware
compute optimal TTS strategy so of this
paper fa 10 this reward integration is
so beautiful because finally we
integrate into optimization to reward
model but you know what looking at this
and say hey maybe I need a fresh up on
what exactly is the definition of a
compute optimal scaling strategy in this
particular case no so this is now the
second paper remember snil this is now
paper from Snell UC see Berkeley Google
Deep Mind yes unbelievable you say what
this is already from August of 2024 yes
it's a good one it's an old one but it's
a beautiful one you know why because it
answers here the formalization of
computer optimal scaling strategies and
it has so many data let's jump into this
so let's come here to the core element
and the authors tell us hey we found
that the efficacy of a given approach
heavily
correlates with the difficulty of a
specific problem from the perspective of
a based llm
capabilities so the more difficult my
query my prompt is the more challenging
it will be to find the perfect TTS
optimization and the arst tell us hey
this motivated us to introduce the
notion of a compute optimal scaling of
test time computation which prescribes
here an Adaptive prompt dependent
strategy to improve the performance
under a given test time compute
budget you say isn't this beautiful so
test time compute budget is clear in the
worst case it is just 2 seconds 5
seconds minutes 3 minutes 5 minutes 10
minutes an hour whatever you like and
now find here give them a Time budget or
a computational budget find the best
adaptive prompt dependent complexity
dependent strategy for the TT as
algorithm in the combination here of the
policy model and the reward model and
half a year ago we had not yet the
reward model integrated but never mind
the results are amazing let's look at
this here and it's here you have three
option no the best of n okay then the
beam search where we selected the top
end samples at each step using here the
PRM or then even more a look ahead
search my goodness this sounds complex
and you might said hey this is the best
model well you're are going to be
surprised I can tell
you look at this these are different PRM
search
methodologies so either you go with best
of end here to the full solution and say
hey a verifier tells me that this is the
correct solution or in beam search we
don't go here the complete way to the
end but we have intermediate solution
steps so again parallel four and you see
verify tells us hey step two three four
two and four well look interesting
continue with those you see one and
three and here two goes on Yep this is
it this is it and yeah so we reach here
then a final destination where the
verifier tells us say this is your
solution to your specific questions or
look ahead now this is like beam search
but at each step here you have a roll
out for three four five steps in advance
using here the PM value at the end of
the roller to present you the value for
the current step so there's a lot of
let's call it guessing into this but can
give you here not just this single step
trajectory evaluation but if a multistep
you know you look a little bit further
in the future but the future PM um
calculations are rather not as precise
as you would like to
be and here we have now the data isn't
this beautiful so green we have the
majority beautiful the best of n here in
Orange and in red we have beam search
and blue so you see here if we have here
an increase in the in the generation
budget and on the y- AIS we have to test
accuracy of a particular mathematical
Benchmark in percentage you see red and
blue red and blue the beam search
algorithm for TTS those seem to be here
at the beginning here the best solution
but then you see there then suddenly
here we have this s look ahead coming up
a little bit but then if we increase
again here the generation budget we have
still here the blue we have here the
beam and now suddenly the best of n
weighted methodology shows its real
power so you see if you compare those
methodology it is not as easy that you
have one best model at at a particular
generation budget or to generation time
but this is a real complex
thing in order to understand the
dependencies now of the comp lexity
level they did a difficulty bin analysis
and now they only compare the beam
search and against the best of end
because those are the two most
interesting one now to make a long story
short if you look at this and you have
your increasing difficulty level to the
right and you see you have here TTC
budget of four and here you have a TTC
budget of 256 my goodness 256
Generations you see the performance jump
again the same mathematical test
accuracy here in the X on the y- AIS you
see yeah we're around
80% but if you go to a higher complexity
you see blue dominates and blue is beam
search
suddenly so if you have a medium
difficulty problems we see that beam
search demonstrate here consistent
improvement over the best of n so it is
not that you go here completely you make
the jump here to the final solution but
you go segment by segment and you build
here a specific beam Sur SE algorithm
that seems to be and provide here some
good Solutions but you see even here at
level five it completely rushes down and
yeah
great so what we achieved with this
paper if you have a deep dive and look
at all the formula at first we have a
searching you remember we had the search
space the box now we are searching
against the dens processware verifier
reward model our PRM that we always
looked at in detail and having it now we
also have here a case that we can update
now the model distribution over a
response
adaptively you can then go the next step
to have a self-reflective PRM and and
end there are endless possibilities but
it is so nice you have if you want a
pure search PRM or you go here to an
Adaptive
refinement PRM and I'm going to show you
here
uh comparison in about 5 minutes
time you have seen this before because
in the video where I showed your AI
agents new interference reasoning with Q
the qas we did exactly the same no we
had here our interference TTC reasoning
is happening we had here we had here the
final odds and we said okay if you only
have a final reward signal at the end of
thinking this is not as great we use the
mol research methodology to build your
reasoning trees and and then at each
step in the reasoning trees we will use
here a process reward mod to provide
here some hint at the first run of
course it was just a p
distribution a process reward model that
then we can optimize and this will help
us in deciding which is the perfect way
step one step 8 step 12 step 15 to
arrive at the correct
solution this is more or less the same
we just use different tool tools what to
call it research but you see we also
used here for the search algorithm but
for the process reward mod it was more L
the same idea so you see we are circling
here in mid-February
2025 we are here all about the same
topic we are sitting in our helicopters
here cruising here over this target
area the study had a
beautiful takeaway and I want to show
you
this the last time this one here and the
pre-training computer the very beginning
of our lrm are not one to one
exchangeable and they come to the
conclusion that an easy medium
mathematical question which are within a
M's
capabilities the test time compute can
easily cover up for some additional
pre-training however now on more
challenging question if we increase the
complexity of our task which are outside
of a given base model capabilities a 1
billion model the pre-training is likely
more effective for improving the
performance so we do run into a wall of
course but that a 1 billion can
outperform a 405 billion I would say the
wall is quite far away but it is there
of course it is there so we cannot do
everything here and the TTC reasoning
complexity if the pre-training has not
already been at the same level of
complexity before we can go maybe a
little step further in the complexity
but there are
limits
great you notice we started with this
and now we call both methodologies that
we looked at more the the real search uh
test time scaling and then the
refinement test time scaling both of
these models will call external TTS test
time scaling comp
scaling
algorithms and now let's come here to a
fact that is simply
amazing we take this now and we say this
is great but you know what we bring it
back into the training
time we say hey if this is what makes
our model reason better reason more we
have now understood the algorithms in
the test time scaling to optimize the
inference reasoning process
now we take this and we say great and we
build it into the model in the first
place so we say let's do here the third
test time compute scaling let's build
here a latent mathematical space where
we can implement this
optimization now there's something now
going wrong and you clearly see this
because this is not test time scaling
anymore we are here in the training time
compute the latent space is not in a
normal Transformer model that we have so
we have to modify now the real transform
architecture of our llm and the simplest
way is we look at recurrent models we
look at D DT models deep sing models
I'll show you this in a minute so what
we do we add the recurrent block to the
transform architecture so we modify here
the underlying architecture of
everything our
Transformer and we add a recurrent block
and this is the beautiful study February
2025 and you have here this is from
Institute Tuan Max plank Institute for
intell system Dutchland Germany
University of Maryland and the Lawrence
limore National Laboratory
and they published this and they said
hey you know what now they also called
it a scaling up the test time compute
with latent
reasoning a recurring depth approach but
it is not really precise because we just
take the ideas and the algorithms from
the test time compute
optimization we build a general
recurrent depth
architecture and then we apply Latin
reasoning in the training time compute
and in the test time compute so let's be
a little bit more specific we build a
complete new architecture for this we
build a new Transformer model for this
given our insights from
TTS embedding here the capacity for
iterative computation and compute
scaling directly into the language mod
core architecture so we modify the
transform itself and you say hey finally
yes great let's do this now the ERS
build a very tiny 3.5 billion feet train
parameter small language wall and now
they built it this with the new
recurrent Block in its
architecture and they call it here LM
the language model with adapt
recurrence and you might say why now
adapt will be really easy recurrence if
you're not familiar with the latest
years in EI and statistics and
theoretical physics and computer science
it is easy it is easy recurrent simply
means we have here kind of a spiral and
we spiral deeper and deeper into the
reasoning so this is it's not a loop
this is more than a loop this is really
an improvement you know going down and
down and down deeper and deeper into
reasoning process but since this is now
recurring Block in the architecture this
block if you do now the training the the
block is here and if we do here a test
time scaling the block is here so this
is an inherent part of the new
Transformer architecture so you can call
the block here a test time scaling block
no it is an original inherent block it
is there full
stop so let's forget that this is an
internal test time scaling element
because test time scaling is this here
this here is not test time scaling so
yeah there's a little bit of a hiup here
with the precise um marketing but you
know exactly what we are looking for so
having now this recording blog is an
inherent part in the architecture at the
test time the M can iterate longer to
use a more computer and improve its
performance and I know what you going to
say but this is not a test time
algorithm no
no let's have a look at it let's clarify
this we call this here we train here
language model with adapt recurrence
module a recurrent block so we modify
the transformer in the training time
computer already so this means we need a
new training algorithm a new training
process to train this kind of
Transformer for our deep reasoning and
then the block is there as an inherent
element and we can use it then but
instead of scaling here the test time
reasoning by verbalizing here long chain
of ss the model does something else the
model cannot improve
entirely by reasoning in a lent
mathematical in a pure mathematical
State before any
verbalization is
happening nice you might say because
normally our test time scaling is
happening when the verbalization has
been done when the sentences has have
been
formed but no we stay in this pure new
mathematical compute State and to be
precise to a level that you say Hey you
are crazy it is not here scaling test
time
reasoning because I will show you a
surprising effect at the end of this
video so the one way to unlock all of
this and I thought about this for years
I'm not like my subscriber who leave me
a comment who says hey I thought about
the same thing like you showed me that
here here stand for our MIT or Howard
was doing now I had the same feeling you
know there's an unta potential if we
just do this in a loop why not go Loop
Loop Loop and reasoning deeper and
deeper and deeper and this is exactly
what they're doing but you don't use
here a transform architecture for but
they add here a recurring unit here to
our llm and this unit runs in a loop
which is not really correct it's more a
spiral but never mind so we have
iteratively processing and updating its
hidden State and enabling here
computations to be carried on almost
indefinitely so this is the main idea in
our transform architecture we have a
recurring block that is just thinkinking
it does nothing else than Sy syn s Sy s
s Sy but how do we build this block and
what are the elements of this blog this
is the interesting thing
yeah if we have this plug and we have
test time inference time the model canot
improve in performance through the
recurrent reasoning in the Lattin space
and that's it this is an additional
feature and this is the reason why with
a 3.5 billion with recurring depth
module block can now have an equal
performance in the mathematical
reasoning to a 50 billion
model so you see suddenly we bring over
all our insights from test time compute
scaling
into how to optimize the transform
architecture
itself if you look this is a
mathematical space we can analyze here
the features in this mathematical space
and if you are a little bit on the
mathematical side you do this and you
see that in this space something
happening we have some symmetries
developing in the space if we do here
deeper and deeper and deeper reasoning
and there are now shapes developed in
this pure Latin mathematical space here
especially if you do numerical
computation and there's now a complete
new Theory I mean for me because I'm a
stupid idiot but if you are have a PhD
in mathematics you know that there are
elements in the pure mathematical theory
that would support this but more about
this in a later video great yeah let's
look at the model itself how do we build
the reiring block ladies and gentlemen
this is the way you do it and I have
here a screenshot to be as precise as
possible the model is primarily
structured around the decoder only
Transformer block so H GPT model these
blocks are structured into three
functional groups now like in music you
know we have a beginning this is called
the prute and then we have the end of
the music this is the coder this is the
end of the music so we have a beginning
and the end and now you're not going to
believe it but in the middle there's
also something in the middle and we call
it a recurrent
block the prute is simple it embeds you
the input data into this new
mathematical space using here our
Transformer layers that you
know in the recurring block itself so
when we have established a mathematical
space this is our central unit of
computation and we just compute and
modify states to the extent I already
shown you the
formula and if we have done all the
calculations we have at the end of the
coder we unemed here result from the
Lattin space and it bringing it back
here with a prediction hat here to the
verbalization that's all there is the
only special element is that this
recurrent block you can have your spiral
down in the reasoning so if you want it
in a real simple way think about this
first step the prut is we embed data in
this new mathematical
space then we calculate the data in the
Latin space with the recurring block and
at the end we uned we extract the data
from our artificial mathematical space
from the Latin space and convert it back
into words into sentences that's
it yeah each block contains multiple
layers and each layer contains here the
standard causal self attention block
using rope and the a gated MLP plus we
use here the classical RMS Norm as our
normalization
function there is nothing particular
interesting to this we have our self
attention block we use here positional
encoding we have our MLP we have a
normalization function everything is as
normal but how do you get the idea that
you say hey wait a minute I put here
recurrent block here in our Transformer
where does this come from and you might
say hey wow this just happened overnight
I'm so sorry to tell you no this took
years to develop and hundreds of people
so the idea originated according to my
humble opinion here in the literature on
the recur new networks or what they call
here the deep thinking
networks it is damn difficult to get an
original paper from the time I mean we
are talking here about 2023 everything
disappeared behind pay Walls by the
publishing houses I have here only here
as you see uh paper under the double
blind review here for the conference
paper 2024 but this is the paper by
Shield at all from 2023 talking about
here the latest development in recurrent
neural
networks schwat Shield is here one of
the main ERS if you want to know about
DT Nets about deep thinking
networks over there the whole theory of
a recurring block more or less
originated and I read scheld as staring
2020 2021 so this is from 2023 so you
got an idea hey there are five years of
research here in whatever Consortium
where they already prepared here the way
for
this the prior work makes clear that
this DT Nets are capable of learning
scalable algorithmic processes that can
solve problems of arbitrary size when
trained only on small examples this was
the fascinating idea this was the hook
that they said hey how is this possible
that this is working so DT Nets in
itself a
beautiful theory that you can have a
deep dive but gee everything almost is
behind here pay wall so if you find here
some of schat Shield's archive a PDF
link please put a link here in the
description for the community to find it
because otherwise you see I have to go
here with double PL
refuse this recurring design here was
here kind of minimal seot required to
learn here stable iterative operators
and they give us here a beautiful
example here for the recurrent design
why they took care this recurrent block
as the main element of the new
Transformer think of this as a gradient
Descent of a function X may be a
variable of interest and Y is not a data
now the gradient Descent of this
function starts here from initial random
State xcore ser and repeatedly applies
here simple mathematical operation the
gradient of the function it optimizes
and it depend on the previous dat xcore
K and the data
y note that we need to use Y in every
single step to actually optimize our
function similarly we repeatedly
injected the data e and our setup in
every step of the
recurrence so given here from the
example of a gradient descent they found
out if they use this recurrent block
they have to feed the input continuously
into this block which is in interesting
itself so if you want to have a little
bit of a deep dive into the recurring
block or you have an adapter Matrix here
so the current block first uses an
adapter Matrix that takes here the
concatenation of the current state s IUS
one and the input embedding e and this
operation Maps you the combined Vector
into the model hidden
Dimension and this concatenation as
opposed to addition or whatever have the
just tell us we have found that this
works best and if we have this after the
adapt the output passes through several
Transformer layers these layers are
organized now in a specific sandwich
format you have the classical attention
sub layer with the caal self attention
using ropia for positional encoding then
you have your MLP and you have here the
norm for stabilization there's nothing
particular to this here at the end you
have another layer of the normalization
beautiful if if you are not sure about
rope go to my channel put in rope you
have two videos rope positional and
batting up to 100K Contex length when up
to 1 million
token and now this recurring blog as I
told you it is an inherent part of the
Transformer so we use this now the recar
Block in the training phase and then if
it is trained this is now the beauty in
the test time scaling we can also use
another recordon block so let's have a
look at this so in the training phase
they integrated requir blog is build on
Transformers computational graph it is
used to itly update the Latin State s by
combining here the input embeding e with
the previous state beautiful and during
the training the number of iteration you
know the number of spiring down is
randomly sampled from a log normal
personone
distribution and this variability
ensures that the model learns to have to
handle different computational depths
effectively teaching it to sync with
various amount of compute deeper and
deeper and then a test time scaling at
the inference run we unroll this the
same learned Recon block is now applied
but you can choose to run more iteration
that we typically used during the
training if you add here I don't know 20
or 25 go with 30 so this extended
unrolling allows the model to allocate
additional compute for deeper
reasoning because the com block is
active during the training the model
becomes more robust to the change in the
number of iteration when you scale test
time compute it behaves like a standard
Transformer module but with an extended
Dept of thinking of reasoning of
computation that was learned during
training so again the training
performance is one of the dominant
factors if you have a good training you
will got get a good inference
run test time scaling might be again not
the right wording because TTS is not
really what's Happening Here we just use
here a architecture element of a
transformer where we can say okay go
down this spiral 30 times this is if you
want this is a kind of scaling okay but
yeah so be aware we have now three
different times of
TTS the a showed us here for the
training data they give us everything
they make it open source they give us
the pre-training data everything and
they are able to schedule here close to
800 billion tokens of pre-training here
for the main model you just go there
here to the GitHub REO beautiful you
have Apache 2 license great all the data
is there all the recipes are there all
the training routines are there they
give you the details to really
beautifully write out everything that
you should use for the tokenizer the
downloads the script the par files
everything it is beautifully
documented and they say now find model
is now here the hugging
0125 beautiful and of course you find it
on hugging
face isn't this beautiful what I
personally found interesting is not that
it was trained to 800 billion tokens but
it was trained on
amd's AI machine the Mi
250X not the 300 the new 300 but the the
old old on the quotation mark the old
250X
so real interesting to see that now
people start here to train the new
Transformer models under AMD AI machine
and not just on Nvidia
gpus okay so this was quite a an
interesting thing to learn and to
prepare this video for you and I have to
tell you I learned quite a lot of this
so if we talk about three different axes
of TTS three different model of TTS so
let's have a look at the simplest one
the first two we have as I told you here
in the box we have a search based TTS
with our prms and then we have a
revision based TTS with our prms and
here you see the different mechanism
role process and
analogy search is simple you just
explore here multiple in parall
independent candidate solution revision
based you iteratively refine here single
solution through self correction self
refinement beautifully done but you need
of course a PRM so the PRM here picks if
you want the best revision model from
all the revisions that are offered to
you and the PRM chooses here this is the
golden way to go if you would like to
sing this about a map and analogy here
so here with the search based TTS with
the prms you explore multiple routes on
a map guided here by the expert feedback
off of your PRM and weion based you
iteratively refine here a single root
but guided con instantly here step by
step by the expert feedback of a PRM
where you revise here and you say huh
maybe you can come back here another
step if you're not successful and find
another way it is completely up to you
which of these two TTS to choose but be
careful now you know the prms for this
particular task you must use carefully
from hugging
face and the thir axis of our if you
want TTS the third methodology the
induced methodology now is latent
reasoning it really dramatically
improves performance on the reasoning t
on the Deep reasoning the complex
reasoning task by expanding here the
test time computation but not by TTS
algorithm itself but because we activate
the recurrent block which is an inherent
architectural element of the new
Transformer
beautiful and let's finish here this
video with the original wordings here
from the orst and they say you know this
leads us to believe that this Latin
reasoning is a promising research
direction to complement existing
approaches for test time compute scaling
and there you have it this is
complimentary to the other two
methodologies I just showed you so we
really have if you want three different
versions so pure search based revision
based you can have even some hybrid
version of this but then this this opens
up now again if you do the training
phase right for the recurrent block this
opens up a third optimization problem
for you so you can gain additional
performance for your model but hey this
just to tell you this was just more or
less a mathematical proof of concept a
model is 3.5 billion parameter model
they built was just in my simple wording
a proof of concept it is not really
established knowledge we just started to
explore this we don't know about the
problems we're going to encounter but it
seems that this methodology is real
interest this new transform architecture
has really some interesting aspects to
this but of course the negative side is
we have to start here the training phase
of all these miles again but we can
reduce the complexity in the pure
training data but now here the first
problem how far can we reduce the
complexity the or argue that you can
reduce the complexity in the training
phase quite
significantly but I do not think so I
think there's somewhere threshold if you
are make it too simple the model cannot
simply start some discover how to have
here an integral form or solve here some
differentiation equation suddenly if you
know just plus minus
so this will be absolutely fascinating
in the future so why don't have you a
look at these topics why don't you read
these papers and I'm sure this just
happened this week so maybe next week we
will have the next paper on this but for
you to know we have more or less three
different axes of this test time compute
scaling two that are established and the
third one that is brand new new
Transformer new proof of concept
and my goodness the future is absolutely
interested and if you are interested to
see more of this video hey why not
subscribe